# Understanding and Configuring Eelpond Workflows

`eelpond` is designed to facilitate running standard workflows and analyses for sequence data. It integrates snakemake rules for commonly used tools, and provides several end-to-end protocols for analyzing RNAseq data. Workflows are highly customizable, and all command-line options for each tool are available for modification via the configuration file.

## Specify Input Data: Reads

Note: at the moment, `eelpond` assumes **all input data is gzipped**, so please input gzipped data!

To run any workflow, we need to get reads (and any assemblies already generated) into the right format for `eelpond`. We can either (1) link the data from another location on your machine, or (2) download the data via http or ftp. This is done through a utility rule called `get_data`.

To specify input data, we generate a `my-samples.tsv` file, with either file paths or download links

If we had our test data within the `data` folder in the main `eelpond` directory, the file would look like this:

    ```
    sample  unit    fq1 fq2 condition
    0Hour   001 data/0Hour_ATCACG_L002_R1_001.extract.fastq.gz data/0Hour_ATCACG_L002_R2_001.extract.fastq.gz time0
    0Hour   002 data/0Hour_ATCACG_L002_R1_002.extract.fastq.gz data/0Hour_ATCACG_L002_R2_002.extract.fastq.gz time0
    6Hour   001 data/6Hour_CGATGT_L002_R1_001.extract.fastq.gz data/6Hour_CGATGT_L002_R2_001.extract.fastq.gz time6
    6Hour   002 data/6Hour_CGATGT_L002_R1_002.extract.fastq.gz data/6Hour_CGATGT_L002_R2_002.extract.fastq.gz time6
    ```

If we want to download the test data instead:

    ```
    sample  unit    fq1 fq2 condition
    0Hour   001 https://osf.io/vw4dt/download   https://osf.io/b47s2/download   time0
    0Hour   002 https://osf.io/92jr6/download   https://osf.io/qzea8/download   time0
    6Hour   001 https://osf.io/ft3am/download   https://osf.io/jqmsx/download   time6
    6Hour   002 https://osf.io/rnkq3/download   https://osf.io/bt9vh/download   time6
    ```

**Note that proper formatting means all columns must be separated by tabs, not spaces!**


**About the TSV:**

  - for now, the column headers must be: `sample`, `unit`, `fq1`, `fq2`, `condition`. Additional headers are not a problem, but will not be used. 
  - If you have single-end samples, please be sure to include the `fq2` column, but leave the column blank
  - the `condition` column is used for differential expression comparisions in DESeq2. The "condition" values can be anything, but they need to correspond with the "contrast" information you pass into DESeq2. If using the `diffexp` workflow, see our docs [here](diffexp.md) and be sure to add the differential expression information into your `yaml` configuration file.
  - Formatting the `tsv` can be a bit annoying. It's slightly easier if you start from a working version by copying the sample data to a new file (see below).


If you'd like to start from a working version, copy (and then modify) the sample data:

```
cp examples/nema.samples.tsv my_samples.tsv
```


## Specify Input Data: Assembly

If you'd like to use `eelpond` with an existing transcriptome assembly, you can specify this assembly in the configuration file. The assembly is copied into the working `eelpond` directory via a utility rule called `assemblyinput`. You can see the lines you need to use by running the following:

```
./run_eelpond config.yaml assemblyinput --print_params
```

You should see these parameters print to your screen:
```
  ####################  assemblyinput  ####################
assemblyinput:
  assembly: examples/nema.assembly.fasta
  gene_trans_map: examples/nema.assembly.fasta.gene_trans_map
  assembly_extension: _input
  #####################################################
```

These filenames correspond to a test Trinity assembly we built using the `nema` test data. To use your own files, specify the file path to your `fasta` file. If you have a gene to transcript map, please specify it as well. If not, do not add that line to your `config`. The `assembly_extension` parameter is important: this is what allows us to build assemblies from several different assemblers on the same dataset. Feel free to use `_input`, as specified above, or pick something equally simple yet
informative. **Note: Please don't use additional underscores (`_`) in this extension!** 


## Choosing and running a workflow

We offer a number of workflows, including end-to-end workflows that conduct assembly through differential expression analysis. The default workflow is the [Eel Pond RNAseq workflow](eel_pond_workflow.md), which conducts *de novo* transcriptome assembly, annotation, and quick differential expression analysis on a set of short-read Illumina data using a single command. 

### Available Workflows

Currently, all workflows require a properly-formatted read inputs `tsv` file as input. Some workflows, e.g. `annotation`, can work on either on a  _de novo_ transcriptome generated by `eelpond`, or on previously-generated assemblies. To add an assembly as input, specify it via `assemblyinput` in the `yaml` config file, as described in [Understanding and Configuring Workflows](about_and_configure.md).


**workflows**

  - preprocess: Read Quality Trimming and Filtering (fastqc, trimmomatic)
  - kmer_trim: Kmer Trimming and/or Digital Normalization (khmer)
  - assemble: Transcriptome Assembly (trinity)
  - assemblyinput: Specify assembly for downstream steps
  - annotate : Annotate the transcriptome (dammit)
  - sourmash_compute: Build sourmash signatures for the reads and assembly (sourmash)
  - quantify: Quantify transcripts (salmon)
  - diffexp: Conduct differential expression (DESeq2)
  - plass_assemble: assemble at the protein level with PLASS
  - paladin_map: map to a protein assembly using paladin

**end-to-end workflows:**

  - **default**: preprocess, kmer_trim, assemble, annotate, quantify
  - **protein assembly**: preprocess, kmer_trim, plass_assemble, paladin_map


You can see the available workflows (and which programs they run) by using the `--print_workflows` flag:
```
./run_eelpond examples/nema.yaml --print_workflows
```

Each included tool can also be run independently, if appropriate input files are provided. This is not always intuitive, so please see our documentation for running each tools for details (described as "Advanced Usage"). To see all available tools, run:

```
./run_eelpond examples/nema.yaml --print_rules
```

### Configuring Parameters for a workflow

For any workflow, we need to provide a configuration file that specifies the path to your samples file or assemblyinput (discussed above).

We can generate this file either by:

  1. Adding just the desired parameters
  2. Allowing `eelpond` to build a (long) full configfile for us, and modifying as desired.


**Option 1: Adding just the required parameters**

The configuration file primarily provides the location of the input data and/or input assembly. The simplest config file contains just this information.

```
samples: samples.tsv
```
or 
```
assemblyinput:
  assembly: assembly.fasta
  assembly_extension: "_input"
```


There are a few other options we can add to customize the name of the output directory and files.

  - `basename: NAME`: helps determine file names and output directory (by default: `BASENAME_out`)
  - `experiment: EXPERIMENT`: some additional "experiment" info to add to the output directory name ( outdir: `BASENAME_EXPERIMENT_out`)
  - `out_path: /full/path`: if you want to redirect the output to some location *not* under the `eelpond` directory.`


Now, if you'd like to run any particular program with non-default parameters, or you're running differential expression analysis, you'll need to add some info to the config. For any (each) program, follow this format to see program params:

```
./run_eelpond config.yaml <PROGRAM> --print_params
```

For example, for deseq2:
```
./run_eelpond config.yaml deseq2 --print_params
```

Then copy and paste the parameters that show up in your terminal into your config file. Please see each program's documentation for additional info on what (and how) to modify each program. For example, if running an assembly, we definitely recommend modifying the `max_memory` parameter of Trinity.


**Option 2: Use `eelpond` to add all parameters for our workflow of choice**

To get a configfile for the default "eel pond" workflow, that you can modify, run:

```
./run_eelpond my_workflow.yaml --build_config
```

The output should be a `yaml` configfile. At the top, you should see:

```
  ####################  Eelpond Pipeline Configfile  ####################
basename: eelpond
experiment: _experiment1
samples: samples.tsv
```

First, change the `samples.tsv` name to your `my_samples.tsv` file. Then, modify the basename and any experiment info you'd like to add. The default output directory will be: `basename_experiment_out` within the main `eelpond` directory. If you'd like, you can add one more parameter to the top section: `out_path: OUTPUT_PATH`, if you'd like the output to go somewhere other than the `eelpond` directory. Note the basename and experiment are still used to determine the output directory name.


**Customizing program parameters:**

Below this section, you should see some parameters for each program run in this workflow. For example, here's the first few programs: a utility to download or link your data, quality trim with trimmomtic, and assess quality with fastqc. Program parameters do not always show up in order in this file - order in this file does not affect program run order.

```
get_data:
  download_data: false
  use_ftp: false
trimmomatic:
  adapter_file:
    pe_path: ep_utils/TruSeq3-PE-2.fa
    se_path: ep_utils/TruSeq3-SE.fa
  trim_cmd: ILLUMINACLIP:{}:2:40:15 LEADING:2 TRAILING:2 SLIDINGWINDOW:4:15 MINLEN:25
  extra: ''
fastqc:
  extra: ''
```

Override default params for any program by modifying the values for any of the paramters under that program name. For example, if you'd like to download data instead of link it from another location on your machine, modify `download_data` to `True` under the `get_data` program. We provide an `extra` parameter wherever possible to give you access to additional command-line parameters for each program that we have not specifically enabled changes for.

For example, under the `trimmomatic` section, you can modify the "extra" param to pass any extra trimmomatic parameters, e.g.:

```
trimmomatic:
  extra: 'HEADCROP:5' # to remove the first 5 bases at the front of the read.
```

For more on what parameters are available, see the docs for each specific program or utility rule under the "Available Workflows" --> "Programs Used" navigation tab.
