# Quickstart

Linux is the recommended OS. Nearly everything also works on MacOSX, but some programs (FastQC, Trinity) are troublesome.

## Installations: Conda 

**`eelpond`** uses [conda](conda.io), an open source package and environment management system, to manage tool installations. The quickest way to get started with conda is to install [miniconda](https://conda.io/miniconda.html). 

```
wget https://repo.continuum.io/miniconda/Miniconda3-latest-Linux-x86_64.sh
bash Miniconda3-latest-Linux-x86_64.sh -b
echo export PATH="$HOME/miniconda3/bin:$PATH" >> ~/.bash_profile
source ~/.bash_profile
```

As a side note, if you're working on a cloud computing system, you may be able to find an image where conda has been pre-installed (such as this Ubuntu 16.04 [Jetstream image](https://use.jetstream-cloud.org/application/images/107)). 

## Get `eelpond`

Now, get the **`eelpond`** code
```
git clone https://github.com/dib-lab/eelpond.git
cd eelpond
```

## Create a working environment

Eelpond needs a few programs installed in order to run properly. To handle this, we run `eelpond` within a conda environment that contains all dependencies. 

When you first get **`eelpond`**, you'll need to create this environment on your machine:
```
conda env create --file environment.yml -n eelpond
```

Now, activate that environment: 
```
conda activate eelpond
```
To deactivate after you've finished running `eelpond`, type `conda deactivate`. You'll need to reactivate this environment anytime you want to run eelpond.

Now you can start running workflows on test data!

## Running test data 

The Eel Pond protocol (which inspired the `eelpond` name) included line-by-line commands that the user could follow along with using a test dataset provided in the instructions. We have re-implemented the protocol here to enable automated *de novo* transcriptome assembly, annotation, and quick differential expression analysis on a set of short-read Illumina data using a single command. See more about this protocol [here](eel_pond_workflow.md).

To test the default workflow:
```
./run_eelpond examples/nema.yaml default
```
This will download and run a small set of _Nematostella vectensis_ test data (from [Tulin et al., 2013](https://evodevojournal.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/2041-9139-4-16))

## Running Your Own Data

To run your own data, you'll need to create two files:

  - a `tsv` file containing your sample info
  - a `yaml` file containing basic configuration info

Generate these by following instructions here: [Understanding and Configuring Workflows](configure.md).


## Available Workflows

Currently, all workflows require a properly-formatted read inputs `tsv` file as input. Some workflows, e.g. `annotation`, can work on either on a  _de novo_ transcriptome generated by `eelpond`, or on previously-generated assemblies. To add an assembly as input, specify it via `assemblyinput` in the `yaml` config file, as described in [Understanding and Configuring Workflows](configure.md).


**workflows**

  - preprocess: Read Quality Trimming and Filtering (fastqc, trimmomatic)
  - kmer_trim: Kmer Trimming and/or Digital Normalization (khmer)
  - assemble: Transcriptome Assembly (trinity)
  - assemblyinput: Specify assembly for downstream steps
  - annotate : Annotate the transcriptome (dammit)
  - sourmash_compute: Build sourmash signatures for the reads and assembly (sourmash)
  - quantify: Quantify transcripts (salmon) 
  - diffexp: Conduct differential expression (DESeq2)
  - plass_assemble: assemble at the protein level with PLASS
  - paladin_map: map to a protein assembly using paladin

**end-to-end workflows:**  

  - **default**: preprocess, kmer_trim, assemble, annotate, quantify 
  - **protein assembly**: preprocess, kmer_trim, plass_assemble, paladin_map 


You can see the available workflows (and which programs they run) by using the `--print_workflows` flag:

```
./run_eelpond examples/nema.yaml --print_workflows
```

Each included tool can also be run independently, if appropriate input files are provided. This is not always intuitive, so please see our documentation for running each tools for details (described as "Advanced Usage"). To see all available tools, run:

```
./run_eelpond examples/nema.yaml --print_rules
```

## Additional Info

See the help, here:
```
./run_eelpond -h
```

**References:**  

  * [original eel-pond protocol docs, last updated 2015](https://khmer-protocols.readthedocs.io/en/ctb/mrnaseq/)
  * [eel-pond protocol docs, last updated 2016](http://eel-pond.readthedocs.io/en/latest/)
  * [DIBSI, nonmodel RNAseq workshop, July 2017](http://dibsi-rnaseq.readthedocs.io/en/latest/)
  * [SIO-BUG, nonmodel RNAseq workshop, October 2017](http://rnaseq-workshop-2017.readthedocs.io/en/latest/index.html)


